---
title: Presenting YAMS, the Awesome MIPS Server!
layout: post
description: >
  How my friends and I wrote an HTTP/1.1 server with built-in Brainfuck
  interpreter, all in MIPS assembly.
keywords: assembly http project
---

Now that exams and projects are all finished for this semester, I finally have
the chance to present some of this semester's most exciting accomplishments to
the world.  First on this list is YAMS.  This was a collaborative course project
for EECS 314, Computer Architecture.  I worked with [Katherine Cass][],
[Jeff Copeland][], [Andrew Mason][], [Aaron Neyer][], and [Thomas Murphy][] in
order to write an HTTP 1.0 server in MIPS assembly.

[Katherine Cass]: https://github.com/k4therin2
[Jeff Copeland]:  https://github.com/jpcjr
[Andrew Mason]:   https://github.com/ajm188
[Aaron Neyer]:    https://github.com/Aaronneyer
[Thomas Murphy]:  https://github.com/thomasrussellmurphy


Background
----------

If you don't know what assembly language or HTTP are, read this section.
Otherwise, you can skip it!

### MIPS Assembly

[MIPS][1] is an instruction set architecture.  In a nutshell, that means that it
defines a set of low-level operations for a processor to do.  These operations
are (very) simple arithmetic, memory access, conditional branching, etc.  The
operations specified by the instruction set are actually performed by circuits
in the processor.  A while back, when processor speed was much slower (and
compilers were not very sophisticated), programmers would write code directly in
assembly language, which is just a text representation of these instructions.
This allowed programmers to have fine control over what the hardware was doing.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIPS

However, compilers and processor speeds have changed most of that.  Compilers
are programs that translate other programs from one language to another.
Frequently, compilers translate from a high level language into assembly.  As
compiler technology has improved, compilers have gotten better than humans at
optimizing assembly, and so now programmers mainly write in higher level
languages.  Since this was a course project, we had to write a program in MIPS
assembly.  The fun and interesting thing about this is that everything is a
little harder in assembly.

### HTTP

HTTP is the protocol of the World Wide Web.  When you run a web browser, you
want to view pages that are on other computers.  So, your computer has to talk
to those computers to get the pages.  When your computer does that, it's using
HTTP.  In a nutshell, HTTP has commands like GET, where the client asks for a
page, and POST, where it sends some information (like data from a form) and gets
a response back from the server.

Just like you need to run a program (a web browser) to get webpages, the server
computers have to run programs to serve them to you.  These programs are called
web servers.  The life of a web server is pretty simple.  It listens for
requests from web browsers, and then sends responses back.

There are versions of HTTP too.  The important ones are 1.0, 1.1, and 2.  HTTP
1.0 is rather old, but some still use it.  Most sites use 1.1, which is a bit
more sophisticated (which means more difficult to implement).  In both of those
versions, the client sends a message in plain text to the server that looks
roughly like this:

```
GET /blog/index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: brennan.io
```

[HTTP 2][3] is an up and coming standard that aims to speed up HTTP a lot.  It's
out of the scope of this discussion, but it's also pretty interesting.  We
decided to implement an HTTP 1.0 server because it's simpler than HTTP 1.1, and
that matters a lot when doing assembly programming.

[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP/2


Why YAMS?
---------

Our team consisted of six extremely geeky EECS students, so we had to make sure
the name of our project measured up.  YAMS stands for YAMS: the Awesome MIPS
Server.  Not only is this acronym [recursive][2], but it also contains another
acronym (MIPS) inside it.  Plus, it brings to mind images of sweet potatoes, and
it has served as the source for plenty of dorky puns.

[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recursive_acronym


How?
----

### Socket System Calls

MIPS is not the most common instruction set on the block, at least for personal
computers.  So, you can't run a MIPS program on your computer without a MIPS
simulator.  We used a simulator named [MARS][4].

[4]: http://courses.missouristate.edu/kenvollmar/mars/

Since MIPS doesn't actually have any capability to interact with the Internet,
we had to extend MARS by adding system calls.  System calls are a really
important concept in computers.  When a program needs to do anything with the
computer that involves outside resources (input, output, dealing with files,
etc), it could simply start using that resource.  But, if another process was
using that resource at the same time, then all sorts of bad things would happen.
Plus, the programmer would have to know *how* to use that resource, when ideally
they only should have to know *what* they want to do with it.  So, one of the
main functions of an operating system is to provide an interface to those
outside resources.  When a program needs them, it talks to the operating system
by using a system call.  The operating system does what the program asks and
returns control to the program when it's done.

In a typical operating system (I'll talk about UNIX, but there are equivalents
for Windows), there are system calls for networking.  We use something called a
"socket", which is (put simply) just a connection you can throw data into.
Typical system calls for sockets include: creating sockets (`socket(3)`),
binding them to IP addresses (`bind(3)`), accepting connections on them
(`listen(3)`, `accept(3)`), and of course reading and writing to/from them
(`read(3)`, `write(3)`).

MARS allows us to create our own system calls in Java.  So, we implemented those
system calls (using their Java equivalents) to allow our MIPS program to access
the Internet through a similar socket interface to UNIX's.

### Requests

Once we had implemented the socket system calls, getting a simple program that
listened for connections and sent a canned response wasn't too hard.  However, a
web server needs to be able to understand requests and send back the correct
file.  So, we had to "parse" the requests.  This wouldn't be too difficult in
most programming languages.  But in assembly, there are no functions for working
with strings (that is, text).  So, we had to implement our own versions of
several common string functions.  This was one of my tasks, so I know the most
about it.  I wrote 12 functions that are typically found in the C header file
`string.h`.

In order to make sure the code worked, I wrote tests for each function.  Many
programming languages have tools for writing tests quickly and easily.  Of
course, assembly does not.  I came up with a "unit testing framework" that would
run a series of tests, and print a report on whether each one passed or failed.
With this, I was able to make sure that the string functions worked before we
ever used any of them.

Using these string functions, we were able to parse two types of requests: GET
and POST.  Since I didn't write any code for parsing requests, I can't go into
very many details.  But, the main point was that this code took a request and
returned the request type, URL, important headers, and any data included in the
request.

### Responses

A GET request contains no data.  In order to respond to these, we simply opened
the file.  If the file didn't exist, we sent back an HTTP 404 error.  If it did,
we sent it to the client.  One important issue is that you normally need to know
the length of a file before sending it back to the client.  This would mean
reading the whole file into a buffer which may not be big enough.  Instead of
doing that, we simply used the HTTP header "Transfer-Encoding: identity".  This
basically means that the response will be completed when you close the
connection, and so the server doesn't need to declare the size of the file
beforehand.  Therefore, we had a very simple implementation in which we read
sections of the file into a buffer, wrote that into the socket, and repeated
until the file ended.

A POST request contains data, but other than that it is pretty similar to a GET
request.  Semantically, POST means that the client is sending data which will
change the server's state.  Since our server only serves files (i.e., it's
static), supporting POST requests doesn't really make sense.  The reason we
supported it is for our little Easter Egg, a Brainf*** interpreter.


Brainf*** Interpreter
---------------------

[Brainf***][5] is a very silly little programming language.  It's meant to be
the simplest language that can be Turing-complete (i.e. compute any computable
function).  It consists of just 8 different commands (that are one character
each).  Basically, this language simulates a Turing machine.  You are given a
"tape" of memory that is very large.  You have commands to move left and right
along the tape, increment and decrement the value (a single byte) stored at that
location, and to input/output the value at that location.  Finally, there are
branching instructions that allow conditional branching based on the current
value in the cell.

[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brainfuck

Writing any program in Brainf*** is very difficult (even more so than
assembly!).  However, many people have taken the challenge and produced
interesting Brainf*** programs, which can be found all over the Internet.
However, the trade-off with such a difficult language is that it is very easy to
implement!  As an Easter-Egg feature in our web server, we created a Brainf***
interpreter (which was the other thing I wrote the code for).  The public
interface had two parts.  First, you load a program by sending it in a POST
request to the URL `/load`.  Then, you run it by sending a POST request with any
input to the URL `/run`.  The interpreter returns its output in the POST
response.

The code loading function performs a few tasks.  Its primary task is to take
code and copy it into the server's internal BF code buffer.  As it does so, it
removes all text that isn't one of the 8 control characters of BF, and it makes
sure that all looping brackets are balanced.  In a sense, this is a syntax
checking phase of the interpreter.

The `/run` function is a loop that processes each command in order.  It
maintains a pointer to the current instruction, input and output buffers, and
the current tape cell.  Increment, decrement, input, output, left, and right
instructions are all fairly simple -- they modify the pointers and values in the
tape cell.  The looping constructs are slightly more complex.  First, they test
the loop condition.  In the case that they need to skip the block of code, or
loop back to the beginning, they read through each instruction until they find
the matching bracket.  All in all, the `/run` command is implemented in only 140
lines of assembly code (including comments and whitespace).

In order to use the Brainf*** interpreter, we included a webpage that serves as
a user interface for the interpreter.  It sends AJAX requests to the web server
to load and run code.  However, you could use something as simple as the `curl`
command to send programs and input to the server.


Try It
------

If you want to try all this fun stuff out for yourself, you can, since all the
code is on [GitHub][6]!  There are instructions on the project homepage for
patching MARS and running it.  Since building the modded version of MARS
requires Unix, you can download a prebuilt version at the [release page][7].

[6]: https://github.com/brenns10/yams
[7]: https://github.com/brenns10/yams/releases

If you decide to look at the presentation, you'll need to get the "reveal.js"
code placed in the `html/reveal.js` folder.  If you cloned our repository using
Git, you can just `git submodule init` and `git submodule update`.  Otherwise,
you'll have to download their ZIP and extract it into that folder.

To run everything, you just fire up MARS, load `mips/main.asm`, and hit the run
button.  Then, point your browser at <http://localhost:19001/>.  You can see the
presentation at <http://localhost:19001/presentation.html> and the interpreter
at <http://localhost:19001/brainfuck.html>.

I'm also hosting my own copy of the YAMS website content here.  You can look at
our presentation [here][8].  Not all the links work correctly (and the
interpreter won't work since the server isn't running).  This way you don't need
to get reveal.js to see our presentation.

[8]: http://brennan.io/yams/presentation.html


Conclusion
----------

We spent a lot of time toiling away at YAMS, and the end result is something we
think is pretty darn cool.  There's a lot I didn't get the chance to present in
this blog post.  I focused mostly on my own code because I knew it best, but you
can see it all at GitHub.  Hopefully somebody out there will find it pretty
interesting!
