---
layout: post
title: Embracing modularity with Meson
description: |
  How I've adopted the Meson build system to promote more modular,
  self-contained personal C libraries.
featured: true
---

Almost seven years ago, I made the [first commit][] to my very first C library.
It was a personal C library -- so personal that I gave it the name "libstephen",
ensuring that nobody else would ever even *consider* using it. And to be fair,
nobody should have used it! This was a data structures library written by a kid
with a few weeks of C experience and a bunch of basic Java coursework under his
belt. Without getting into specifics, the code was pretty bad.

But as bad as the code was, it was mine. It functioned correctly! It had tests!
I was even able to start using it in other projects. Having pre-made data
structures made C feel like an easier language. It let me tackle larger problems
without drowning in the details of every little thing. But soon, a problem
emerged. I invested a lot of time into making this library really easy to
develop, but I didn't know how to make it easy to _use_. The best way I knew to
use libstephen was to create a git submodule, and then do something like this in
your Makefile:

    libstephen/bin/release/libstephen.a:
        make -C libstephen

    CFLAGS += -I libstephen/include/
    # Don't forget to add library to your link command

It was clumsy, but it worked. But I grew to hate this approach for a few
reasons. First, there was no real versioning - if I made a breaking change in
libstephen, I had to be sure not to update past a certain git revision until I
updated my dependencies. And second, I had invested so much time in libstephen's
build system and tools, that making new projects was frustrating because they
didn't have any of those tools. Sure, I could add those features over and over
to each new project, but that was repetitive busy work. I found a "better" way.

Rather than creating new libraries and new projects, I just fudged it: I threw
**all** my code into this library. Want to implement regex? Boom! Put it in
libstephen. A lisp-based programming language? Add it to libstephen! Logging
library? Why not add it as well? What started out as a library of data
structures got crazy bloated, all because (a) it wasn't easy to create new
projects, and (b) it wasn't easy to use my existing libraries in projects.

As a result, libstephen has turned into a bit of an embarassment for me. It's
very bloated, the code isn't great, but it has a lot of useful stuff, and my
projects depended on it. But a few months ago I stumbled upon a set of tools
with the potential to solve this problem, and I've been using them to fix up
this mess. The centerpiece to it all is build system called [Meson][].

## Dependency management in Meson

For those who are into open source C/C++ projects, Meson is not new. Projects
like GNOME and Systemd have migrated to Meson, and migrating software to Meson
seems to still be a trendy thing to do.

For those who aren't familiar, Meson is a build system similar to Autotools or
CMake. It aims to solve a few problems:

1. Compiling your code (probably the easiest of the problems)
2. Finding libraries you depend on, and linking against them
3. Allowing users to configure your build

Vanilla Makefiles, as I had been most familiar with before this, are good at #1
but don't help you much with #2 or #3. As a result, systems like CMake and
Autotools will actually handle #2 and #3, and generate makefiles to do #1.

Coming from languages like Python, which have package management built-in, it
almost seemed strange that C had no standard system for that. The closest thing
to traditional package management in C is that you can compile many autotools
projects like this:

    tar xf package.tar.gz
    cd package
    ./configure --add some --options here
    make
    sudo make install

Of course, this will fail if you're missing a dependent library, so you need to
do dependency resolution yourself. So at the end of the day, it's not very easy,
and it's certainly not very automated.

Meson presents a pretty elegant solution to this whole mess. In your
`meson.build` file (roughly similar to a Makefile), you write something like
this:

    libstephen_dep = dependency(
      'libstephen',
      fallback: ['libstephen', 'libstephen_dep'],
      version: '>=0.3.1',
    )
    # ...
    my_project = executable(
      # ...
      dependencies : [
        libstephen_dep,
      ],
    )

The `dependency()` function call basically says this:

1. Look for a C library named `libstephen` installed to the system.
2. If you find one, and it satisfies the version requirements, then use it!
3. Otherwise, fall back to a "subproject" called libstephen, and use the
   dependency named `libstephen_dep` declared in its `meson.build`.

Later, the `executable()` call declares a program, and by including the
dependency, it handles linking the library with your program, as well as adding
the correct include directories for you. Pretty nifty!

The "subproject" exists as a fallback for when the dependency isn't installed to
the system, but it's actually pretty useful on its own. Essentially, your
project contains a `subprojects` directory, which would contain a file like
this named `libstephen.wrap`:

    [wrap-git]
    directory = libstephen.git
    url = https://github.com/brenns10/libstephen
    revision = v0.4.0

This instructs Meson to pull a git repository at a particular revision. You can
also ask it to grab a tarball from the web (and provide a checksum for that
file). The resulting directory should have a `meson.build` file which can build
the project. If the project doesn't use Meson, you can even add "patches" to the
subproject which contain a `meson.build`. At the end of the day, your meson
build file just needs to provide a "dependency" declaration that allows this
library to get linked into your project.

When all this is in place, you can compile your project with:

    meson build     # analogous to ./configure
    ninja -C build  # analogous to make

Meson will automatically locate your dependencies and set up the build system to
either link against the system version, or build a local version.

## Transitive dependencies and diamonds

So what if project A depends on B, and B depends on C? Well, Meson makes it
pretty simple. Project A needs to include subprojects for B and C. If project A
included project B and didn't know about C, Meson even provides a nice warning
message:

    |Looking for a fallback subproject for the dependency C
    |subprojects/B/meson.build:26: WARNING: Dependency C not found but it is available in a sub-subproject.
    |To use it in the current project, promote it by going in the project source
    |root and issuing the following command:
    |meson wrap promote subprojects/B/subprojects/C.wrap

This is my favorite kind of error message: one which tells you exactly how to
fix it. Since project B already had the wrap file necessary to compile project
C, Meson helpfully can copy it for you into project A's `subprojects` directory.
This is nice because a wrap file will specify the _exact_ version of a
dependency that you're using, and you're free to modify the version that B is
using, or leave it alone.

This comes in handy for diamond dependencies. Take the following example:

    A --- depends on -----> B ----- depends on -----\
     \                                               \
      \-- depends on -----> D ----- depends on -----> C

In this situation, we have A, B, and C in the same chain as last time. But in
addition, A depends on D, and D also depends on C, creating a diamond. Although
it seems like this is more complicated, the same principle applies! Project A
will include the wrap file for B, C, and D, and B and D will share the same
version of C. So long as there is a version of C which is compatible with both B
and C, you're all set. And, even better, if Meson finds any of the dependencies
installed to the system, it will use those too.

## Small projects and easy dependencies

This has really encouraged me to embrace modularity, and write small, simple
libraries that can be easily tested and do one thing well. I've broken out many
parts of the code from libstephen into smaller libraries which all share similar
naming patterns and similar project structures:

- [sc-regex][]
- [sc-argparse][]
- [sc-collections][]

Each one is much more focused (although the collections library could maybe be
broken into smaller units) and can be included individually. It's pretty easy to
use each library, but in case I need a refresher on using the libraries, or how
to install add them as a dependency, I've created the [sc-examples][] repository
which collects simple, fully-worked examples of small programs that depend on
these libraries, with build scripts and everything.

To make it easier for me to create new modular libraries, I've created
[sc-template][], which can simply be copied into a new repository to streamline
things. None of the template files are too big or complicated, but this just
streamlines the process even more.  Finally, to collect all these projects into
a unified whole, I've started using the Sourcehut project feature: [sc-libs][].

## Embracing cosistent tooling

Along with using Meson for all my C libraries, I've started standardizing on a
few other tools which I use in my [sc-template][] to enforce consistency:

- Meson automatically generates `compile_commands.json`, which can be consumed
  by clangd to provide a LSP server for any editor.
- I use a standard `.clang-format` file to enforce a roughly Linux-kernel coding
  standard on my code.
- I use the [pre-commit][] library to automatically format my code when I
  commit.
- I'm starting to standardize on the Unity test framework, which integrates
  nicely into Meson's testing system and automatic code coverage generation.
- All my projects use roughly semantic versioning scheme and maintain
  changelogs.

Looking forward, I hope that I can benefit from a few more pieces of shared
tooling:

- Consistent use of Doxygen to document public APIs and produce documentation.
- Use a Sourcehut builds to do CI testing, and publish documentation as well as
  source tarballs for new releases.

## The end result

The result of this work has been pretty great. After several months of
(intermittent) effort, my IRC Chatbot [cbot][] has been migrated onto Meson, and
has managed to shake its `libstephen` dependency in favor of my `sc-libs`.

While there's nothing too revolutionary about this set of tools I've been using,
it has made me feel really refreshed. For the first time, I feel like I have a
set of usable tools for managing C library dependencies, that enables me to
write modular code like I would in any other language. Hopefully this
long-winded post gives other some insight or inspiration to learn Meson too!

[first commit]: https://github.com/brenns10/libstephen/commit/7ba2657a4b6320d0756b8c84a086e82fbb90acda
[Meson]: https://mesonbuild.com/index.html
[sc-regex]: https://git.sr.ht/~brenns10/sc-regex
[sc-argparse]: https://git.sr.ht/~brenns10/sc-argparse
[sc-collections]: https://git.sr.ht/~brenns10/sc-collections
[sc-template]: https://git.sr.ht/~brenns10/sc-template
[sc-examples]: https://git.sr.ht/~brenns10/sc-examples
[pre-commit]: https://pre-commit.com/
[cbot]: https://github.com/brenns10/cbot
[sc-libs]: https://sr.ht/~brenns10/sc-libs/
